[Music]
being the tallest mountain on the
surface of our planet Mount Everest peak
reaches a dizzying height of 29,000 and
30 feet but the most amazing thing about
this giant is that it's still growing
yep Chomolungma which is yet another
name of Everest gets one tenth of an
inch taller every year but what if all
mountains on earth never stop growing
what if you never stop growing well
that's another video one day you wake up
to some breaking news it turns out that
all the mountain ranges and peaks in the
world have increased in size overnight
and it doesn't look like they're
planning this nob anytime soon true to
form in a week or so most mountains
already reached the height of 10,000
feet
that's when helicopters stopped flying
in particularly mountainous regions
because the average altitude a
helicopter can climb is exactly around
10,000 feet when in about a month
mountains reached the height of 40,000
feet people realize that traveling
somewhere far away isn't as easy as it
used to be because now they can't just
buy a plane ticket mostly because the
majority of airplane routes are
unavailable out the average cruising
altitude for an airliner is 30 to 35,000
feet any higher and there is not enough
oxygen in the air to fuel the engines
plus the air itself becomes too thin to
hold the plane up surely aircraft could
try to find a way through a rocky maze
of the newly grown mountains but it
would be too risky and would endanger
the lives of everyone on board
so if you need to get somewhere you can
drive or probably take a train or a bus
sailing has become dangerous as well
because not only the mountains on the
surface of the planet have grown taller
there are more than 100
and seamounts in the world with about
30,000 of them in the Pacific Ocean
that's why container and cruise ships
rest in ports until people try to figure
out safe routes that won't end up in any
shipwreck but you should keep in mind
that more than 90% of all the world's
cargo is transported by sea and that's
oil machine parts equipment electronics
clothes and footwear food and drinks
furniture toys and whatnot and since
it's too dangerous for container ships
to roam the waters of the world's oceans
people start to feel an acute shortage
of many things they've forgotten how to
live without Mountaineers are in
distress because they can't conquer
mountain peaks anymore the thing is that
people start to feel altitude sickness
already at the height of 8,000 feet and
you need to be super healthy and well
prepared to climb up to the peak of
Mount Everest only about 5,000 people
have managed to conquer this peak so far
their oxygen levels are three times
lower than they are at sea level so
climbing any higher than Everest
unlikely but with mountains growing
taller and taller there appears on
another serious problem when researchers
calculated the weight of Mount Everest
it turned out to be 357 trillion pounds
and that's without the weight of snow
and ice that cover the peak of the giant
in a thick layer but even though Everest
is already heavy beyond belief should it
grow it would be even heavier that means
that the mass of all the other mountains
on earth would be getting bigger and
bigger as well and the more substantial
the mass of something becomes the
stronger the gravity of this object gets
so in our fictional scenario it's our
planet's gravity that increases and you
can probably imagine the consequences
but the chances are high that soon after
mountain started to grow you would only
be able to crawl around
get about running or jumping birds
wouldn't fly anymore high-rise buildings
bridges and other man-made constructions
as well as tall trees would start to
collapse but the Earth's core has to
deal with a more dramatic challenge it
works non-stop holding around
six-and-a-half sextillion tons of the
planet's mass and once this load gets
even heavier the core might simply
collapse inward putting it into
everything on the surface of the planet
uh-oh I don't like where my story has
taken us luckily you'll never have to
find out the real-life consequences of
mountains growing too tall on this
planet if only because the mountains
that exist on earth will never get
significantly higher and one of the
reasons is the very gravity I've already
mentioned but first let's figure out how
mountains form the Earth's crust or the
surface layer is mobile and dynamic it's
divided into ginormous pieces that move
around as time passes
also known as tectonic plates that's why
from time to time they collide and the
plates touching edges get pushed upward
welcome a newly born mountain by the way
that's exactly how Mount Everest saw the
light of day but the tectonic plates
don't stop as if trying to find out
which one is stronger they keep pushing
against each other and meanwhile the
mountain grows taller but one day it
becomes too tall and heavy to fight
gravity and the mass of the mountain
itself prevents it from growing up on
the other hand the collision of tectonic
plates isn't the only way a mountain can
form there are also volcanic mountains
like the ones on the Hawaiian Islands
for some reason in a particular place
beneath the surface of the planet there
accumulates too much magma and it
presses on the Earth's crust from the
inside at some point all this pressure
blows up the crust and bursts outside in
the streams of lava fountains of molten
rock and clouds of ash molten rock
starts to pile up and eventually a
mountain his form but even in this case
gran
he still doesn't let the mountain grow
too tall and heavy in other words if
gravity on earth was weaker mountains
would grow taller just like on Mars the
red planet is home to the tallest
mountain in the whole solar system or at
least the one we know about Olympus Mons
the height of this Martian giant is 80
mm and 20 feet which is almost three
times taller than Everest
how come this mountain grew so tall well
for one thing eruptions occurred more
often on Mars and mountain creating lava
flows kept going on Mars way longer than
here on earth plus the crust of the Red
Planet
isn't divided into tectonic plates on
earth the movements of these plates
distribute lava all over the planet and
among different volcanoes but on Mars
where the crust doesn't move all the
lava gets piled up into one tremendous
volcano but let's return to our native
planet and the second reason why
mountains don't keep growing
surprisingly its rivers I used to think
that rivers on the contrary make
mountains look taller apparently I was
wrong by eroding the materials a
mountain is made of rivers can trigger
landslides
and those don't let the mountain grow as
tall as it could otherwise but how about
underwater mountains they are already
surrounded by water so rivers can't
really influence them right yeah but
don't forget about gravity and
landslides these factors still have some
influence on underwater mountains even
though it's not that great water has
higher density than air and it better
supports mountains against gravity
that's the reason why underwater
mountains are often way taller than
those on the surface for example an
inactive volcano in Hawaii mauna kea is
actually the world's tallest mountain if
you measure it from the base to its
summit its height is 30 3,500 feet a bit
greater than that of Everest but since
the base of the volcano sits deep in the
Pacific Ocean you can only see 13,000
796 feet up a mountain peaking above sea
level
Aloha hey if you learned something new
today then give the video a like and
share it with a friend and here are some
other videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life